Discuss with you mineralization
and your mineral presentation.
Yeah. Uh, gentlemen, I would ask you if you're so obliging
that you decide how you wanna work this today, I mean,
we'd like 35 minutes is a, a great deal of time
and it will perhaps be prudent that you chair it
and split it between questions and answers
and your introductory remarks.
Good. I'll leave it with you. Thank
You very much. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. And, uh, thank you
for the opportunity of being able to meet with you.
Uh, we're not coming to ask you for something today.
Um, we're just, uh, keen to, uh,
share some knowledge about a new product that we've, um,
become acquainted with coming out of Australia from a bunch
of scientists who have been working in the, in the area
of tissue culture and plants.
Um, but looking for new ways, uh,
and more environmentally conscious ways of dealing with, uh,
plant growth and, um, soil development.
My background's in farming.
I've farmed, um, all my life now, retired, um,
but, uh, uh, was national president
of Federated farmers many moons ago
and actually sat in this select
committee for six years mm-hmm.
In a former life. Um,
I've traveled widely studied agriculture in many different
countries in Africa and Asia and Europe, us, et cetera.
And I've never seen anything
that comes anywhere near this product
that we are gonna share the knowledge of today in terms
of its impact and consequences.
Um, the product increases yield
quite dramatically in some instances,
over a hundred percent double the capacity of some plants
and fruits to produce.
Secondly, it improves the nutrient value in plants,
so it substantially increases nutrients.
S the important things that we have in, in not just grass,
but in fruits and vegetables, anything that grows,
it sequesters carbon into the soil, develops, um,
soil depth, uh, increases carbon levels
and soils very significant that even in soils
that are recognized as being sort
of carbon saturated, whatever that might mean.
Mm-hmm. It, um, it, uh, also we believe,
and have, we have no actual proof of this,
but we believe by a simple matter of deduction,
that it will also reduce methane, um, uh, emissions.
And, and John will talk about a bit
that a wee bit in a moment.
Uh, it's cost applied is, uh,
less than conventional in PKS fertilizers.
Um, but we are, we're just so, uh, enamored with it and,
and I pretty practically we're excited about the prospects
of doing this in New Zealand.
Uh, and, and it's, it's really about saying that
the whole organic, um, regenerative farming thing
can now move forward a, a dramatic step forward
because of, of the yield increases
and the nutrient, um, level increases.
I'll let John just walk you through some of the science.
Unfortunately, we haven't got time to go through it all,
but it is quite important to understand
that it doesn't focus on plants, it focuses on the soil
and the microbes of the soil, John.
So this, as Owen said, I absolutely agree,
is the most exciting product in agriculture
that I've seen in 50 years.
It's just something
that's quite extraordinary, your background.
And it, um,
my background is a ag science degree,
was farm supervisor at clock, house
principal at Telford Farm Training Institute.
Um, two head office institutions, head office of Ministry
of Ag and Fisheries, um,
and then planning manager
for the coal corporation when that was established.
So, um, done a bit of corporate work around the world, um,
worked for a DB and World Bank and, and others.
Um, this is just beyond anything that I've seen.
So it's, it's one of the, those beautiful pieces
of lateral thinking that's come out
of the scientific community.
So these guys, he's a plant physiologist.
He does a lot of work in tissue culture
and has got a deep understanding of the needs for cells
to survive and thrive when you're doing
that fine tissue culture work.
Um, and they said, look, all of the
literature deals with 11 to 15 minerals.
There's 212 in the periodic table. What are they there for?
And then started to say, well, look, it's all good
and well for the plants,
because we sort of understand the process of having
to have soluble minerals that go through the roots.
What do the microbes need?
Is it the same and is it different? And guess what it's not.
And guess what? The microbes are deficient
in critical minerals that are absolutely essential
for microbial reproduction.
So you'll get a very low level
of microbes surviving in the soil that are native there,
but they're deficient in these critical minerals
that they need for reproduction.
And when it's supplied, it's like Viagra for microbes.
They multiply dramatically.
Um, they're attracted to the roots
of the plant, and they cluster around
and attach themselves to the roots.
If we look at this picture here
that looks like the dreadlocks, that's
what happens under this system where the microbes have
formed a fiberglass test tube for the wonder
of a term around the root.
The microbes, uh, you know,
the numbers are in the billions in the soil,
but if we start talking about bacteria, for instance,
they've got a life cycle of eight to 10 hours.
And so now we've got a fiberglass test tube
holding a perfectly mineralized soup of dead
and dying bacteria.
And so they're providing all of the minerals for the plant
in a balanced and perfect way that they can just dip into.
But it goes beyond that.
It's beyond the simple NPK type minerals
and includes, um, complex biochemicals.
So hormones, growth stimulants,
antibiotics, antivirals.
And so the other feature with this is that in all cases,
they require no artificial fertilizers,
no pesticides, and they more than double the yield.
So the other graph that's worth turning to,
if you want a quick look, is the, one of the crop yields
the bar graph, page five.
And if we have a look at that,
tomatoes in Queensland went from 130 ton
to 490 ton for HEC deer sugar
went from 130 ton to close
to 300 ton onions.
Went from 40 ton, a 30 ton to 80 ton,
um, ginger capskin, sorghum chilies, every crop
that we've seen this used on it more than double the yield.
And then, if I can just take you quickly, given that we want
to move through this quickly,
and we've got this fear to look through, um, beef cattle
in Queensland love h on on fairly arid
Queensland soils on pasture was treated
with the mineral, with the minerals,
and they moved from 1.2 kilos live weight gain a day
to 2.95 kilos, life weight gain a day.
And there wouldn't be many farmers doing over about 1.6, 1.7
that consider them to, that's be pretty lucky.
I think I'm going, I've struck gold when I get to two.
Yeah, just an extraordinary change.
The other significant thing is those cattle
in Queensland had no lice, no ticks,
and no internal parasites.
So the, the health benefits was
transmitting from the minerals through the grass
into the cows, and the immunity of the cows was such
that they were sustaining themselves against
external parasite attacks.
Let's go to the broccoli one.
You've got a broccoli there too. Now,
On, on the basis that they were getting that level
of live weight gain, we took the view that said, there has
to be a reason for this
because cows can only eat so much in a day,
and it had to either be more nutrition in the grass
or more digestion of what they ate.
So we did a trial on some broccoli,
and you'll find a picture of broccoli
There. Page six.
The total nutritional content of the broccoli grown with
conventional fertilizer was 519 units.
The total nutritional content of the broccoli grown with the
minerals 1,230 units,
so more than twice than nutritional content.
So the fiber increased by 22%,
the protein over 30% calcium, all of the minerals,
dramatic improvement.
So the,
the vegetables in supermarkets have gone down in nutritional
content by something over 75% since 1950.
This is something which is starting to turn this around,
and it's that ability to, of the microbes
to do their job in the soil
and to transfer those complex biochemicals
that come out in healthy better produce
Of, I've, uh, been around a long time
and I've had a few people come up my drive
and say, I've got the greatest product for you that you need
and it does this, this, and this,
and you eventually show them the gate.
Um, when we first saw these numbers, we thought, yeah,
another one of those fly the night.
So the guys said, come over to Queensland, spend some time,
go and talk to the farmers on your own.
Go around and look at it with your own eyes.
And I gotta say, we saw it and we are seeing it.
We've seen it in China now with things like light cheese
with sugar cane, just massive increases,
improvements in bricks levels, the faster growing period.
It, it's quite dramatic.
So we are now laying down trials in New Zealand up in, uh,
south Auckland Waikato.
Um, we are very keen to talk to an organization
that you'll all be familiar with called Agri Zero,
because we believe that we can
and act in fact, work with them to, uh,
introduce more carbon into the soil,
which would be a bonus in, in the game of, of trying to deal
with, um, uh, some of the environmental issues
that they're associated with.
And we don't know,
but we believe on the basis of logic
that we can reduce methane emissions as well.
So we've got some work to do yet, uh, we need
to get all this collected into sound scientific papers
and peer reviewed and published,
and that process is underway.
But, but this is, we believe so dramatic in terms
of its possible impact on agriculture
and horticulture New Zealand.
Do we want to, So just, just on that, just on
that carbon absorption, um, under the wheat
where there was a wheat trial done at the C-S-I-R-O farm at
the Darling Downs in Australia, um, that's shown in there,
um, was a bad season for Strike Rust.
So the, the conventional fertilizer had a 60%
attack by rust.
The mineralization had less than 10.
It out yielded the standard fertilizer by some 40
or 50% in spite
of the standard fertilizer having 34 units of nitrogen.
And this having three, um, so really is
the thing that Turbocharges organic
and regenerative farming, um, just a number.
They measured the amount of, um,
material and of carbon in the soil from that,
and they'd increased by four
and a half ton of actinides per hectare, 12 ton
of fungi and another five ton of bacteria.
Now, if you take that out to CO2 equivalents,
that's 320 tons
of CO2 per hectare per year,
which is more than twice the amount
that radio out to Pine can do.
It's $60 a ton or whatever it is this week. Mm-hmm.
Just over A nice little nest egg.
Alright, chaps, do you want to go
to questions? Uh, you're keen on questions.
I take questions. Well, Firstly, I, we want
to congratulate you on your, your wonderful, um, submission.
I think it's very, very interesting.
So I'm gonna launch into questions.
If you, if you're obliging, there's a lot of us.
I'm gonna start and kick it off.
How do you make the, the correlation between
what you saw in Australia, uh, knowing
that the soils over there are vastly
older than the source that we have here?
That's the first point I would note.
And when we're talking about livestock and livestock yield,
and I, I think it's noteworthy
what you've acknowledged in Australia again,
but we have a real problem solve consolidation here in
New Zealand that they don't have given the, the,
the tenuous nature
of farming in New Zealand and a lot of rainfall.
So do you wanna square us up on
where you see this product in New Zealand transplant
Australian model into the Kiwi model?
Pastoral farming, you know, not rotational, uh,
rotational grazing, sorry, not set stocking.
How do you see that playing out?
Well, Australians haven't got much to offer really,
but, um, they do have a bit of fertile soil in some
of the river valleys in, in Queensland.
And, and some of the,
these experiments have been done on quite fertile soils
that are being used for market gardens.
So, you know, they've got high yields now,
their older soil, no question about that.
Our soils are younger and are, are likely
to be holding a higher level of nutrients.
And, and it may be that we don't get the same level of, of,
uh, response, but remember this is focusing on
microbes in the soil and,
and on an unknown, well known level,
but of, of, um, trace minerals, micro minerals
that we haven't had anything to do
with here in New Zealand in general state, very few farmers
applying them or even consider them.
So we think that there will have been, even in our 150 years
of whatever, farming, some depletion of those very,
very valuable minor nutrients.
Uh, and, and there's kind of enough evidence now we think,
um, to show that, uh, yes,
there will be a response at what level?
I don't know, but certainly likely
to be significant
compared with what we're doing at the moment.
We've seen it, we've seen it from
arid Queensland cattle country to tropical
wheat coastal horticulture country in Australia.
We've seen in China
and from rice patties to orchards.
Um, we've seen it in Owens Garden in Auckland where
in two weeks as cabbages were twice the size
that were treated with this.
And I'm, I'm, I'm on pizzas, I'm on pizza oil,
beautiful pizza oil.
I can grow anything at my garden.
But these temperatures were twice as big.
Actually got more questions coming.
He see they're stacking them up.
Um, miles, Anderson, uh, and then Rachel,
Couple of questions. So
how's it incorporated in the soil?
It's just spread on top or the,
Uh, good question, miles. Yeah.
Yeah. What, what, what we've doing,
we're using a sawdust, a, a, a mic, a compost, sorry,
a compost mix really to just do two things.
One is to give you something to spread
because a very small amount of product,
and it's quite finely ground, and we're mixing it with Baal
because basals, the natural rock
and all that soils come from natural rocks.
Um, so we mix some, well finely ground Baal,
and it's freely available, 30, $40 a ton,
get it from any, um, quarry.
Uh, we're mixing it in with the compost
because that gives you something
to spread through your spread.
And it also gives the soil a bit of an immediate list of
nutrients, um, and, you know,
gets the whole process away quite quickly.
Yeah. And about one to two ton of compost and,
and a couple of hundred weight of the basalt
and the mix coming out of Australia.
Okay. And so the cost,
you'd add the cost of the, um, compost over
and above the cost of the, the
No, the com, the cost of the compost plus the basalt,
plus the, we call it secret sauce, the proprietary mix,
um, applied.
There's gonna be less than a current NPK mix.
So for a dairy farmer, for example,
doing 770,000, $80,000 for their total
nitrogen and, um, phosphate needs, it'll come in under that.
Now, usually reason we not giving you precise numbers
is because we don't know them.
We just know that if we look at what the cost of the land
and product is, and man, if you guys wanna look at something
and look at shipping, what the way shipping costs of are,
are just killing this country both on inputs and outputs.
It's an incredible thing.
We are facing cost
because we wanna get this product into other countries
around the world, and we are facing enormous
rises in, in shipping costs.
That's an aside. Um, so yes, it'll, it'll come in
probably 10, 15% below pretty typical
farmer applied cost. One
More question, miles, and then we'll go to Rich.
Yeah. So, um, the country,
if the country was to swap over tomorrow, say mm-hmm.
Yep. Where would all the compost come from?
Yeah, so, so I'm, I'm of the view
that compost is probably unnecessary.
It's been developed in Australia with compost. Yeah.
And their issue is very low-carbon soils anyway, so
that's a benefit.
And the compost seeds, the microbes into the system, right?
So it's
Just a spreading agent where,
Where we've got, where they're dealing,
that horticulture unit, there was half a percent carbon.
We'd be talking 40% carbon soils.
So I don't think adding more carbon is
necessary at that point.
So the purpose of it is purely
as a carrier for the minerals.
So you could stick it in your, in your
lime if you wanted to.
We'll palletize it. We'll palletize. So
You could mix it with sawdust, you could mix it
with chicken menu, you could mix it with anything, um,
with liquid womb casts.
Yeah. You can do it liquid. The, it's heavy.
So it's rock minerals.
It's got a specific gravity of 1500 kilos
of cubic meters.
So, um, yes, you need vortex sprayers
and there are vortex sprayers.
Okay. That can do it. Yeah.
Good question, Rachel. Boy,
Thank you. Um, thank
you so much. Um, exciting, uh, presentation.
Very, uh, the question I've got is about
whether there's a capacity
to actually deliver this at scale.
Yes. And the reason I ask is, is, is that, you know,
there's been a huge amount of excitement
about other products.
The one in my region that gets a lot of excitement is,
is opsis, which, um, which, which you feed to cattle.
But in order to do that, you have to be able
to basically cover the country and,
and, um, producing the stuff, right?
So the ability to actually produce it at scale
is actually impossible.
So, um, so my question is about scale. Okay.
So because that's a critical thing, right?
Finding those products that can actually be
produced at scale in order to deliver. It's
A good question. Quickly.
The, the 80% of the mineral mix
is just crush basalt, right?
Basalt's present right throughout the spine in New Zealand,
it's the principle rock that was thrown up.
Now that said, you have to just check,
because not every basalt's suitable.
Some have got some toxic material to microbes in it, um,
but no shortage of basil.
That's everywhere. The second thing is
that these other rock minerals that they're using
are extensive.
The seam that he's getting that out
of is 270 kilometers long in Australia.
And there is absolutely no limit to
what they can do in a fairly quick order.
They, they're getting tooled up at the moment,
and they'll have full blending facilities
and they'll just focus on the critical, uh, elements
or the secret source for the one of a word.
Um, and we'll blend with basalt here, um, to put on
as soon as possible.
We'll move to, uh, granulate that basalt,
so it'll go through all the existing fertilizer equipment.
Thank you. Thank you, John.
We just wanna stress that, I mean, we are still kind
of uncovering all the angles and trying to work through it,
and we're trying to give you a pretty much a heads up.
Can I just do this prior to, we got
Rachel very quickly too, because
The Steve's waiting, um, uh, in Australia.
Like how much coverage have they got in terms
of the market? So
The, the early days yet,
although they've had all four of the mining companies
approach them, uh, for mine rehabilitation,
they've been having difficulties with Revegetation.
Um, the results they're getting from this
are just outstanding.
And those mining companies are spending millions
of dollars a hectare, literally trying to revegetate,
and this is just completely blowing them away at the moment.
It'd be interested that the Chinese government became
aware of Beijing level of what the work
that was being done in southern parts of China on sugarcane,
on la cheese, and a couple of other crops, sweet potatoes.
They immediate, they immediately went to the people
behind this and said they wanted
to commander the entire supply and confine it to, to China.
Now that's interesting little side issue,
but it shows you that somebody's wi, fully aware.
Very, very, very interesting of the capabilities
of this Steve.
Yeah. Um, very excited about the orientation
around valuing the huge benefit
of healthy soil microbial activity
or unlocking the energy that that brings
to agricultural production.
Um, and getting us away from the idea it's just a chemical
exercise, which has been the mindset
of the fertilizer industry for decades.
And they still just test for chemistry.
They don't test for biology. Um, so excited
by that element of it.
My question
and concern I suppose is around that, um, the mining element
of it, you know, with mining du
and, you know, destroyed that country.
We've got blood phosphate, we're still importing from,
um, Africa.
Um, we've got, um,
Chatham Island Rock phosphate was a proposal,
offshore extraction of the like, uh,
we're still importing huge amounts of open fertilizer
and producing it here, cracking it outta the
atmosphere, swap the gas.
So kind of that source ingredient you're talking about
as well as the vessel salt, like what's the kind of scale
of mining we're talking about here?
What are the consequences of that?
Um, and you know, how do you see the, um,
yeah, the downsides at that end of the Yeah.
Production because, you know, the, the, the source
as you call it, has to come from somewhere. Well,
Hopefully we've learned a few lessons from Christmas
Island and Naru and yeah, whatever.
Um, we are talking about 30 odd
kgs per hectare of the, as we call it, the secret source,
which will be mined in Australia.
Yeah. Um, there will be some impact
and they'll be held to, obviously,
by the Australian authorities to a high level of, of, of,
you know, rehabilitation as they go.
Um, yeah, I guess you could say
that there's a potential impact there.
I would, I would kind of argue
that we are gonna fertilize the land.
Um, this is a, a a least of two evils, if you will,
Which is a fair point. I
mean, if it, if you can get an order
of magnitude increase in Yeah. In the impact.
And if we can avoid using artificial nitrogen, I mean,
that alone I think would allow us to
consider some offset.
Yeah, right. Steve, happy with
That, Joe? Yeah.
Uh, thank you for your presentation.
Um, really interested to hear from you.
I'm interested to know where you are at, at the stage
that you are at currently in New Zealand,
whether you're undertaking trials, we, we,
what point you're at here.
You talked about, um, getting scientific evidence,
et cetera, et cetera, and then having it peer reviewed,
and I'm gonna know when you might expect for
that information to be finalized and ready to
Yeah, no, good question, Joe.
What, what we've done, we are working with Ball Brothers,
who I'm sure you're probably all familiar with in,
in the South Auckland area.
Uh, we've, in the process of final negotiations with them
to lay down a trial on one of their big dairy units.
Right. Um, we worked with them with vegetables and, and,
and other products as well.
We laid a trial down at Mag Fury, which is, um,
just a off the Bombay Hills.
Uh, and we'll have results as soon as spring starts.
So we're talking to a number of farmers around the country.
We've engaged, we've engaged Gordon,
and Gordon was the ministry, so scientists
that did most of the work
behind the overseer program. Yeah.
So he's overseeing, So he's overseeing all
the scientific trials.
Okay. And we've got field trials, metering,
grass production now.
And, and the Australian scientists who are behind this,
uh, are well aware that they're required to actually,
you know, formally put this together into a paper,
get a peer reviewed and published and,
and, um, while they got their hands full, um,
because they're getting interest from
all over the world, literally.
Now they need to conduct that
and finish that process off when,
I can't say I'm not sure they
even know, but that will happen.
But our approach to the trials is to
validate the Australian results
and to calibrate the response under New Zealand conditions.
I was just, and so I wanted to that sort of following on,
I was just gonna sort of ask something along that vein.
This might be a really stupid question,
but does soil temperature play a part
in the effectiveness of it?
And it sounds like a lot
of the trials you might undertake home from
North Island. Yeah.
Is there gonna be any happening in the south island
where it's, you know, generally a bit
Cooler? I mean,
question literally grass
and anything, any plants won't grow in cool condition,
particularly when the soil is cool.
Yeah. Yeah. Uh, and so we are going to have to, um, uh,
wait till spring to see what happens at Mag Ferry,
but we've got farmers in, um, o Waka down in the mm-hmm.
Corner of South Island. Okay.
Uh, who are, um, involved with this. Oh, great.
And, and, and two or three other areas, um, okay.
Southern wire wrap. Um, and,
and, you know, their results are gonna start to trickle
and, um, we've gotta try
and keep on top of it in terms of getting those formalized,
getting them independently assessed, and all the stuff that
Goes. Well, that's a, that's
a very good question, Joe.
And I think that we're seeing that in the last cut
that we did at Monga de Ferry, that, that the
microbes are all tucked up in bed at the moment, and,
and not much is happening
Until it does, until it does.
Right. Until does make Mike
Until the soil temperatures lift, then everything will,
We've got about five more minutes, chaps,
and then, um, we'll tie up.
Um, Mike has got a question then Miles,
Uh, thanks to, and sort
of probably asked most of the question.
See you, you know, I'm a little bit like, you know,
you said earlier you're a bit cynical.
You've seen all these, the farmers in the room,
we've seen it through our farming careers.
People rock on up, knock on the door,
they've got all the flash pictures, all the flash figures,
and it's like, this is gonna
revolutionize your farming business.
Yeah. So there's always a degree of cynicism there is.
Um, and, and so I think it's just to probably reiterate
what Joe was saying, it is absolutely critical that, um,
the, um, your trials are, um, independently verifiable Yep.
And proof, because that is the challenge.
And too often we've seen with all these different types
of products over the years.
Yep. Um, here's the data trial and it's like, yep.
You can make that, um, show what you want to show.
And critical is probably the length of the trial
because as you said, um, I think some of those, you get a,
you rating the nutrient bank,
you're getting a double whammy when you do a first trial.
And it's like, I've seen, you know, people come in
and do trials and it's like the next season they do
something, it goes way better.
But there's a number of determinants that, um, contribute to
that, um, to that, um, increase.
And it's like, you know,
half he paddock versus half he paddock for multiple years.
Those are the best trials.
And it's like, we don't often see
that with a lot of these problems. It's
Exactly, exactly what we're doing with balls.
Yep. We, we've taken out blocks of their farm.
Uh, I do you know the property at all? It's, I know.
Swamp and rolling Clay Hill.
Well, we're taking out blocks of the farm
and we're gonna use, um, traditional,
typical fertilizer on some blocks and ours on others,
but they're in blocks so that we can get a week of
the cows being on the one block
and then a week on the other block,
and we'll record milk weights, record weights,
we'll analyze the milk and so forth.
So that, that's going on.
But you know, you're absolutely right.
When I first went over to Australia
and looked at it full of cynicism, I mean,
the first thing we did was we stopped at a pineapple.
Um, you call them orchards. What's a pineapple?
Whatever, plantation. Plantation.
And, and, and do it,
what I thought were two different crops.
One was, you know, yay high and one was yay high.
And, and I, I just, I I just walked past it
and the guy said, aren't you gonna
stop and look at my pineapples?
And I said, why? Well, he said,
these were planted on the same day.
This one said the mineralized compound and this one hasn't.
And, and they were 50% further advanced,
had more heads on them, which is critical for pineapple.
And, and I mean, you kind of, when you see it like that
and you get a farmer saying, look, some fly knife,
the shiny suit, you know, then you start to kind
of dig a bit deeper.
So take and board your comments.
We've gotta do the homework.
We are just giving you guys a first look at it
because we think
that we can answer those really important practical
questions, whether it works at the same degree in
New Zealand with our younger soils yet to be seen.
Thank you. Miles to tie up. Yeah. Um,
The secret sauce that just minerals, or is it, does it
Have some, um, microbes purely in it as well?
Purely rock minerals. There are
No microbes in it.
It's just the elements that the microbes need Yep.
In order to fully perform. Okay.
We, we'd like to have a look at,
Sorry, is It mixed up in like a lab
Out of four? It's,
yes. So he, he, he mixes and blends.
Uh, it's around 10 minerals.
Um, some are liquid, some are, um, solid
and heat blends and presents that as, as the mix.
They're mostly inside.
He sold us, for instance, where do
They come from? Australia
out of rocks.
It's just Australian rocks crushed. So
You just get a teaspoon of this
and a teaspoon of that sort
Of, I mean, all these guys, I, I just want
to introduce you to Yes.
My tea. Okay.
I mean, all these guys did was look at these trace minerals,
you know, the rest of the minerals on the, on the, um,
periodic table and said, you know, do we need this?
And I mean, it came up with something called gallium.
I gallium, I've never heard it. Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I have actually it Oh, you way ahead of me.
I mean, it's, it's virtually a known in agriculture.
So the one essential for the microbe, not
for the plant plant couldn't care less,
but give it to the microbes and boom.
So fascinating. Yeah.
Um, it, it, it was a bit of speculatory stuff.
It was a bit of thought behind it
and putting the right levels together,
putting it right in the right format.
I mean, it's one thing to put on a, any mineral,
but you gotta have a, the mineral in the right form
that the microbes are gonna be able to, so the,
The three, the three level checks
that they've made very clear to us.
Firstly, they've all got
to be there if one's missing, the wheels come off.
Secondly, they need
to be in the right balance one with the other. Yeah,
Absolutely. And
That's the problem where we've been quitting, um,
chemical fertilizers on,
they've unbalanced things and pulled it out of
Outta shock thinking of malyin and being one of them.
Yeah. And there's quite a bit of malyin
and it, the third thing is
that they've gotta be in the right format,
so it's gotta be the right format
of the mineral or else it doesn't work.
So there's a sort of three level check.
And, and this to me is exciting
because these are the first guys I know
who scientifically worked through
that and got it right down.
So it's, um, a lot of people are, are taking rock minerals
as half a dozen people doing bass salt based fertilizers,
but some are groping with some chip manure
and others are putting fish fertilizer or, or carbon or,
or other things with it to try and get some action.
And they are getting something, they're getting 10,
15% responses.
But everything I've seen with this has been north
of a hundred percent.
So you can tie off. Um, so where to from here?
So finish The trials. Yeah. Okay.
And get more trials going, get them overseen.
You know, we were using a Dr.
Regener and he's a acceptable scientist in
most circles in New Zealand.
Um, we, we've got to get the papers written
and peer reviewed, published
because they need that scientific background.
They need that kind of data behind it. Um, then the
Parallel to that, we're doing pad trials
so we can look at Yeah.
Half, half without, so that we can see real operational
And then I'm gonna buy a farm
again. Well, gentlemen, we've
Made time. Thank you
very much. We're very grateful
for your, um, insights.
This has been fascinating, um, uh, hearing of ev e evidence
and I'm, I'm sure it'll generate a lot of
post-hearing conversations.
So thank you both very much for your time today.
Thank you. Thank you all.
And we want to wish you well, Mr.
Chairman and your health journey.
Thank you, sir. I, um, thank you.
I am still very much alive.
Yes. Lovely To see you both, um,
Fortunately is a journey for you. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you both.